## Overview

The SADE Infrastructure running on AWS is protected using mTLS (Mutual TLS authentication):
- The SADE HTTP APIs require mTLS
- The SADE MQTT server (AWS IoT Core) requires mTLS

With mTLS, your computer uses a private key and a certificate to authenticate (much like SSH).

**To connect you will need three files:**
- the CA's certificate file ([here is the download link for `CAs.crt`](attachments/CAs.crt))
- a private key
- a certificate (with your public key)

This is the best way to get a private key and a certificate:

1. You generate a private key locally (this stays on your machine).
2. You generate a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) using that key.
3. You send us the CSR (a `.csr` file).
4. We create a signed certificate (a `.crt` file) using your CSR file.
5. We send you the certificate (the `.crt` file).

This way your private key never leaves your machine.

This document describes how to create a private key and the CSR.

But before proceeding, make sure you have `openssl` installed. On macOS:
```bash
brew install openssl
```

On Linux, `openssl` is usually pre-installed. On Ubuntu:
```bash
apt install openssl
```

---

## Option 1: Web Command Generator (Easiest)

We created web pages that generate the `openssl` commands for you. You enter your details in the form, and the page will output the corresponding bash commands.

The web page is 100% client-side. Your details are never sent anywhere. The JavaScript runs locally in your browser. Your input is only used to construct the commands displayed on the page.

Here's the web page:

https://mm-public-fileshare.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cert-wizard-index.html

1. Navigate to web page
2. Select the type of cert you want
3. Enter your details. The page auto-updates the bash snippet(s) as you type.
3. Open a terminal and `cd` to the directory where you want to save your key and CSR files.
4. Copy and paste the commands into the terminal and run them.

The generated commands will look something like this:

> [!NOTE]
> **DO NOT RUN THE EXAMPLE**
>
> Please generate personalized commands using our online [Cert Wizard](https://mm-public-fileshare.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cert-wizard-index.html)

```bash
# Given:
#   Name:    John Doe
#   Email:   user123@example.edu
#   Org:     Example University
#   Country: US
#   State:   IN

openssl ecparam -name prime256v1 -genkey -noout -out 'user123.key'

openssl req -new \
  -key 'user123.key' \
  -out 'user123.csr' \
  -subj '/C=US/ST=IN/O=Example University/OU=People/CN=person-john-doe-7bca9ab8-d717-44ff-bc94-a964d43afd64' \
  -addext 'subjectAltName = email:user123@example.edu,URI:urn:sade:person:john-doe'

chmod 600 'user123.key'
```

---

## Option 2: Manual Setup

> [!TIP]
> **Heads up:** There's no advantage to this approach over Option 1. These commands are equivalent to the ones generated by our online [Cert Wizard](https://mm-public-fileshare.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cert-wizard-index.html). But here you fill in the placeholders yourself, which is tedious and error prone. Unless you have a specific reason to do it manually, use Option 1 instead. That said, Feel free to read through this if you're curious about what the commands are doing.

> [!NOTE]
> The online [Cert Wizard](https://mm-public-fileshare.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cert-wizard-index.html) can generate `openssl` commands for people, drones, or systems. This guide is for people. Each type uses a slightly different identity template (certificate fields) so that it’s clear what the certificate represents and how it’s being used.

First, `cd` to the directory where you want to save your private key and CSR files.

Generate a private key and update the file permissions:
```bash
openssl ecparam -name prime256v1 -genkey -noout -out private.key
chmod 400 private.key
```

Generate a Certificate Signing Request (CSR):
```bash
openssl req -new \
  -key private.key \
  -out YOUR_EMAIL_LOCAL_PART.csr \
  -subj "/C=US/ST=YOUR_STATE/O=YOUR_ORG/CN=CN=person-YOUR_FIRST_NAME-YOUR_LAST_NAME-UUID" \
  -addext 'subjectAltName = email:YOUR_EMAIL,URI:urn:sade:person:YOUR_FIRST_NAME-YOUR_LAST_NAME'
```

Replace the placeholders:
- `YOUR_EMAIL_LOCAL_PART` — the part of your email address before the `@`. For example, if your email is `user123@example.com`, use `user123`.
- `YOUR_STATE` — your state name (e.g. `Indiana`, `Missouri`, `California`).
- `YOUR_ORG` — your organization name, such as your university (e.g. `Notre Dame`, `SLU`).
- `YOUR_FIRST_NAME YOUR_LAST_NAME` — your name.
- `YOUR_EMAIL` — your email address (e.g. `user123@example.com`).
- `UUID` - a UUIDv4 that you generate. You can create one by running `uuidgen` or by using an online UUID generator such as [uuidgenerator.net](https://www.uuidgenerator.net/)

---

## Next Steps

Once you have your `.csr` file, please send it to us. We'll use it to generate your certificate and send it back to you.

Also, if you haven't already, download the CA certificate file: [CAs.crt](attachments/CAs.crt). You'll want to keep this file along with your private key and certificate. These files are needed to connect to the SADE AWS IoT Core endpoint. Furthermore, you'll need these files to connect to the SADE HTTP endpoints.

Once you get your certificate (a `.crt` file), you're ready to connect to AWS IoT Core and the SADE HTTPS APIs.

> [!NOTE]
> **Your first connection to AWS IoT Core may be dropped when you're using a newly issued certificate. Please wait about 10 seconds and try again. The second connection attempt should succeed.**
> 
> The first time you connect, AWS IoT Core triggers JITP (Just-in-Time Provisioning). During this process, AWS IoT resources are created on your behalf. But your first connection may terminate because IoT core can't authenticate you until these resources exist. 

### How to connect to AWS IoT Core with python and `paho-mqtt`

First make sure you have paho:
```bash
pip install paho-mqtt
```



Then take a look at the example: [attachments/mqtt_example.py](attachments/mqtt_example.py)

### How to connect to AWS IoT Core using `bash`
First make sure you have installed `mosquitto_sub` and `mosquitto_pub`

To install with Homebrew on macOS (and Linux):
```bash
brew install mosquitto 
```

To install on Debian and Ubuntu 26.04:
```bash
apt install mosquitto-clients
```

#### Example script
```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

CLIENT_CERT="./user123.crt"
PRIVATE_KEY="./user123.key"

mosquitto_sub \
  -h "a3dpdfmwa109lg-ats.iot.us-east-2.amazonaws.com" \
  -p 8883 \
  --cert "$CLIENT_CERT" \
  --key "$PRIVATE_KEY" \
  -i "EXAMPLE_MOS_SUB-123" \
  -t test/example

mosquitto_pub \
  -h "a3dpdfmwa109lg-ats.iot.us-east-2.amazonaws.com" \
  -p 8883 \
  -i "EXAMPLE-CLIENT_pub" \
  --cert "$CLIENT_CERT" \
  --key "$PRIVATE_KEY" \
  --keyform pem \
  -t test/example \
  -m "hello world"
```

### How to connect to the SADE APIs with python and `requests`

Install the `requests` library:

```bash
pip install requests
```

Then take a look at the example: [attachments/https_example.py](attachments/https_example.py)

## How to connect to the SADE APIs with `bash` and `curl`

This example uses HTTPS with mutual TLS (mTLS) authentication.

- The server presents a certificate signed by a publicly trusted certificate authority. Because of this, no custom CA bundle is required when accessing the SADE HTTPS APIs.
- The client authenticates itself to the server by presenting a client certificate. The client then uses the corresponding private key during the TLS handshake. The server verifies that the client certificate was signed by a trusted certificate authority.

This example uses `curl`, which comes pre-installed on most systems.

#### Example script

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

CLIENT_CERT="./user123.crt"
PRIVATE_KEY="./user123.key"
URL="https://api.sadezone.org/health"

curl \
  --silent \
  --show-error \
  --cert "$CLIENT_CERT" \
  --key "$PRIVATE_KEY" \
  "$URL"
```

## References

- MQTT topics: [topics.md](topics.md)
- SADE API reference: [API_REFERENCE.md](https://github.com/SADE-ZONE/workflows/blob/main/pages/SADE_AWS_API/API_REFERENCE.md)
